Add Maps to documentation (#856)
aptos-labs/developer-docs: apps/nextra/pages/en/build/smart-contracts/maps.mdx

---
title: "Maps"
---

# Overview

There are multiple different implementations of key-value maps inside the framework, suited for different usecases.
We will go over their differences and similarities, and how to choose which one to use.

## Aptos Blockchain performance and gas cost considerations 

> State on the Aptos Blockchain is managed as a set of resources. Transactions
> performance heavily depends on how reads and writes to resources.
> Storage gas costs are paid based on number of resources that exist, and their sizes. 
> IO gas costs are paid based on number of resources read and modified, and their sizes, 
> but are generally significantly smaller than storage gas costs. 
> That means that writing to a new resource has the highest (storage) gas cost, and deleting
> an existing resource gives the largest refund. 
> Additionally, transactions modifying the same resource conflict with one another, and cannot be
> executed in parallel.
> 
> One useful analogy is thinking about each resource being a file on a disk, 
> then performance of smart contract would correlate well to a program that 
> operates on files in the same way.

Reviewer: I wonder if this should go in a separate page on gas since this is a page about maps, but if you want to keep it here as an overview, i have some suggestions below

```suggestion
Aptos Blockchain state is managed through on-chain **resources**. Furthermore, transaction performance and gas cost is heavily influenced by how these resources are read and written.

Breaking down the gas costs further, we have:
1. Storage gas costs, which are determined by the number and size of resources (i.e., writing to a new resource incurs the highest storage gas cost, whereas deleting an existing resource provides the largest refund.)
2. IO gas costs—generally much lower— which depend on the number and size of resources read and modified. 

Transactions that modify the same resource cannot be executed in parallel, as they conflict with one another.
```

## Different Map implementations

- `OrderedMap` is a struct, and is, similar to `vector`, fully contained within the resource that stores it.

>   With it, it is bounded in size to the size of a single resource.

Reviewer 2: I would use blob to replace resource here.

  It provides regular map functions, as well as accessing elements in order, like front/back or prev/next. 
  When you need an inline mapping, that will fit in a resource, this is the option to choose.
  It's implementation is SortedVectorMap, but because of limited size and efficiency of memcpy, all main operations are practically O(log(n)). 
- `Table` is unbounded in size, puts each (key, value) pair in the separate resource. You can `add` or `remove` elements, 
  or check if it `contains` some key, but cannot be iterated on. When keys or values are large / unbounded, we can use the `Table`. 
  Also if we want to parallelize transactions and we have a few elements that are modified extremely often, `Table` can provide that.
  Note that `Table` cannot be destroyed, because it doesn't know if it is empty.
  - `TableWithLength` is wrapper around the `Table`, that adds tracking of it's `length`, allowing `length`, `empty` and `destroy_empty`

>     operations on top of the `Table`. Adding or removing elements to `TableWithLength` cannot be done in parallel.

Reviewer 3: highlight this "cannot"

shall we discourage people to use TableWithLength?

Author: you cannot use Table if you want to be able to destroy it. 

we probably need TableWithLength variant that uses aggregators. not sure if it is worth copying for that :) maybe TableWithParLength ? :)

> - `OrderedMap` is a struct, and is, similar to `vector`, fully contained within the resource that stores it.
>   With it, it is bounded in size to the size of a single resource.
>   It provides regular map functions, as well as accessing elements in order, like front/back or prev/next. 
>   When you need an inline mapping, that will fit in a resource, this is the option to choose.
>   It's implementation is SortedVectorMap, but because of limited size and efficiency of memcpy, all main operations are practically O(log(n)). 
> - `Table` is unbounded in size, puts each (key, value) pair in the separate resource. You can `add` or `remove` elements, 
>   or check if it `contains` some key, but cannot be iterated on. When keys or values are large / unbounded, we can use the `Table`. 
>   Also if we want to parallelize transactions and we have a few elements that are modified extremely often, `Table` can provide that.
>   Note that `Table` cannot be destroyed, because it doesn't know if it is empty.
>   - `TableWithLength` is wrapper around the `Table`, that adds tracking of it's `length`, allowing `length`, `empty` and `destroy_empty`
>     operations on top of the `Table`. Adding or removing elements to `TableWithLength` cannot be done in parallel.
> - `BigOrderedMap` groups multiple (key, value) pairs in a single resource, but is unbounded in size - and uses more resources as needed.
>   It's implementation is a BPlusTreeMap, where each node is a resource containing OrderedMap, with inner nodes only containing keys, while leaves contain values as well.
>   It is opportunistically parallel - if map has large enough elements to be using multiple resources, modifying the map for keys that are not close
>   to each other should generally be parallel operation.
>   It is configured so that each resource containing internal node has the same capacity in number of keys, 
>   and each resource containing leaf node has the same capacity in the number of (key, value) pairs.
>   Capacity of nodes (both leaf and inner degree) are configurable - to allow the tradeoff between storage gas cost on one end, 
>   and other gas costs and parallelism on the other. 
>   It provides regular map functions, as well as accessing elements in order, like front/back or prev/next. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Implementation      | Size Limit  | Storage Structure | Key Features |
|--------------------|------------|------------------|--------------|
| **OrderedMap**    | Bounded (fits in a single resource) | Stored entirely within the resource | Supports ordered access (front/back, prev/next), implemented as `SortedVectorMap`, O(log(n)) operations |
| **Table**         | Unbounded   | Each (key, value) stored in a separate resource | Supports `add`, `remove`, `contains`, but **not iteration**; useful for large/unbounded keys/values and high-parallelism cases |
| **TableWithLength** | Unbounded  | `Table` with additional length tracking | Supports `length`, `empty`, and `destroy_empty`; cannot modify in parallel |
| **BigOrderedMap** | Unbounded   | Uses multiple resources dynamically | Implemented as `BPlusTreeMap`; **opportunistically parallel** for non-adjacent keys; supports ordered access (front/back, prev/next); configurable node capacities to balance storage and performance |

```

Note:
- `SimpleMap` has been deprecated, and replaced with `OrderedMap`. 
- `SmartTable` has been deprecated, and replaced with `BigOrderedMap`.

## Common map operations:

Most maps above support the same set of functions (for actual signatures and restrictions, check out the corresponding implementations):

#### Creating Tables

> - `new<K, V>(): Self`: creates an empty map

Reviewer: Semantics are a bit confusing here — Tables and maps are the same?

Author: I'll update the title. I'll use map throughout as a general term, and `Table` is just an implementation

- `new<K, V>(): Self<K, V>`: Returns a new `BigOrderedMap` with the default configuration. Only allowed to be called with constant size types. For variable sized types, another constructor is needed, to explicitly select automatic or specific degree selection.
- `new_with_type_size_hints<K, V>(avg_key_bytes: u64, max_key_bytes: u64, avg_value_bytes: u64, max_value_bytes: u64): Self<K, V>`: Returns a map that is configured to perform best when keys and values are of given `avg` sizes, and guarantees to fit elements up to given `max` sizes.
- `new_with_config<K, V>(inner_max_degree: u16, leaf_max_degree: u16, reuse_slots: bool): Self<K, V>`: Returns a new `BigOrderedMap` with the provided max degree consts (the maximum # of children a node can have, both inner and leaf). If 0 is passed for either, then it is dynamically computed based on size of first key and value, and keys and values up to 100x times larger will be accepted.
  If non-0 is passed, sizes of all elements must respect (or their additions will be rejected): 
  - `key_size * inner_max_degree <= MAX_NODE_BYTES`

>   - `entry_size * leaf_max_degree <= MAX_NODE_BYTES`

Reviewer: Maybe make a header for these methods like you did above for Table methods

---

> title: "Maps"

Reviewer 4: I don't think "title" is having the desired effect

Reviewer: https://developer-docs-nextra-git-igor-mapsdocs-aptoslabs.vercel.app/en/build/smart-contracts/maps?

Reviewer 4: Oh ok, I was just seeing the preview of the .mdx file

| `Table`         | Unbounded   | Each (key, value) stored in a separate **slot** | Supports basic operations, like `add`, `remove`, `contains`, but **not iteration**, and **cannot be destroyed**; useful for large/unbounded keys/values and where high-concurrency is needed |
| `TableWithLength` | Unbounded  | same as `Table` | Variant of `Table`, with additional length tracking, which adds `length`, `empty`, and `destroy_empty` methods; Adding or removing elements **cannot** be done concurrently, modifying existing elements can. |
| `BigOrderedMap` | Unbounded | Combines multiple keys into a single **slot**, initially stored within resource that contains it, and grows into multiple **slots** dynamically | Implemented as B+ tree; **opportunistically concurrent** for non-adjacent keys; supports ordered access (front/back, prev/next); configurable node capacities to balance storage and performance |

Note:
- `SimpleMap` has been deprecated, and replaced with `OrderedMap`. 
- `SmartTable` has been deprecated, and replaced with `BigOrderedMap`.

> #### Performance comparison

Reviewer 4: A perf table that highlights the message that creating a "slot" is costly. That is, `Table` is costlier than `BigOrderedMap`
